TWO QUANTITATIVE VARIABLES

Introduction
When associations exist between variables, it means that information about the value of one variable gives us 
information about the value of the other variable. In this lesson, we will cover ways of examining an association 
between two quantitative variables.

Throughout the next few exercises, we’ll examine some data about Texas housing rentals on Craigslist — an online 
classifieds site. The data dictionary is as follows:

price: monthly rental price in U.S.D.
type: type of housing (eg., 'apartment', 'house', 'condo', etc.)
sqfeet: housing area, in square feet
beds: number of beds
baths: number of baths
lat: latitude
long: longitude
Except for type, all of these variables are quantitative. Which pairs of variables do you think might be associated? 
For example, does knowing something about price give you any information about square footage?

Code:
import pandas as pd
import codecademylib3


housing = pd.read_csv('housing_sample.csv')

#print the first 10 rows of data:
print(housing.head(10))



Scatter Plots
One of the best ways to quickly visualize the relationship between quantitative variables is to 
plot them against each other in a scatter plot. This makes it easy to look for patterns or trends in the data. 
Let’s start by plotting the area of a rental against its monthly price to see if we can spot any patterns.

plt.scatter(x = housing.price, y = housing.sqfeet)
plt.xlabel('Rental Price (USD)')
plt.ylabel('Area (Square Feet)')
plt.show()

This image shows a scatter plot with price on the x-axis and area on the y-axis. 
There is a clear linear relationship; rentals that cost more tend to have larger area.

While there’s a lot of variation in the data, it seems like more expensive housing tends to come with slightly
more space. This suggests an association between these two variables.

It’s important to note that different kinds of associations can lead to different patterns in a scatter plot. 
For example, the following plot shows the relationship between the age of a child in months and their weight in pounds. 
We can see that older children tend to weigh more but that the growth rate starts leveling off after 36 months:

Plot showing the relationship between the age of a child in months and their weight in pounds. 
We can see that older children tend to weigh more but that the growth rate starts leveling off after 36 months

If we don’t see any patterns in a scatter plot, we can probably guess that the variables are not associated. 
For example, a scatter plot like this would suggest no association:

Scatter plot with no apparent pattern; the points appear randomly distributed.

Code:



