Visualizing Categorical Data

You work at a veterinary office and want to compare the number of different types of pets people have in a specific town. 
This will give you a sense of what supplies you may need and how many office visits you should expect over the coming year. 
The different types of pets we want to compare are:

Dogs
Cats
Fish
Chinchillas
Birds
Snakes
Lizards
We could summarize this data numerically using a table of frequencies:

Type of Pet	Number of Pets
Dogs	4325
Birds	2423
Cats	5126
Fish	3223
Chinchillas	978
Snakes	1112
Lizards	453

This table of values is informative for a reader. However, it is time-consuming for a casual reader to recognize patterns in the data and pick out useful information. 
We can create a bar chart that displays our data in a way that is easier for readers to digest and more descriptive than a table of values.

Bar chart of the number of pets in the city based on the table of values above

In this example, we can immediately identify the most and least popular pets on the bar chart. 
We also see the range and difference between the number of each pet in each column very clearly.

Instructions
Visualizing categorical data mainly involves the use of pie charts and bar charts. The image to the right shows both of them as well as slight variants. 
In this lesson, we will explore both of these graphs including:

use cases
pros and cons
modifying them for best communication
Let’s get started!



Introduction to Bar Charts
6 min
Now that we have seen what a bar chart looks like, let’s examine more in-depth how and when we utilize them! 
Bar charts are generally used to visualize the relative frequencies of categories within a variable. 
Therefore, they are primarily helpful for visually summarizing categorical variables rather than quantitative variables. 
If you can organize your variable into distinct categories, a bar chart is often a great option! If not, you may need to resort to a different visual.

Once you have your distinct categories, a bar chart is best used to display the different value counts of each category. 
We can also compare means, but we would recommend using a side-by-side box plot for that instead because they give a full picture of the five-number summary.

Vertical vs. Horizontal Bar Charts
Within a bar chart, we have two axes. One axis represents the discrete values within a categorical variable we are comparing, while the other axis measures the counts of each of these values. 
Depending on how we orient these axes, we can either have a horizontal bar chart or a vertical bar chart. Let’s take a look at each below.

Two bar charts: one is horizontal, and one is vertical. Both have five categorical variables along their categorical axes.

Bar Charts vs. Histograms
Finally, we have one last thing to go over before we jump into coding our own charts. 
If you have ever run into histograms, you may notice that bar charts and histograms look almost identical. 
However, these are the key differences between them:

Bar charts are used for categorical variables, while histograms are used for quantitative data.
Histograms must always be arranged in a specific order because they represent a range of numerical values. 
For a bar chart, each bar represents frequencies of category variables within a category. Unless the variable is ordinal, the bars could be arranged in any order.
This image shows the difference between bar charts and histograms. Bar charts noticeably have gaps between the bars, while histograms often have no gaps. 
The histogram also shows numeric ranges along the x-axis, while the bar chart shows categories.

For convenience, click here if you would like to see the above image in a separate window.
