RULES OF PROBABILITY
Introduction
Probability is a way to quantify uncertainty. When we flip a fair coin, we say that there is a 50 percent chance (probability = 0.5) of it coming up tails. 
This means that if we flip INFINITELY many fair coins, half of them will come up tails. 
Similarly, when we roll a six-sided die, we say there is a 1 in 6 chance of rolling a five.

What if we flip a coin in one hand and roll a die in the other at the same time. What is the probability that the coin comes up tails AND the die comes up as a five? 
Is there a way to quantify the probability that these two different events BOTH occur? 
In this lesson, we will walk through different rules of probability that help us quantify the probability of multiple random events.



Union, Intersection, and Complement
Let’s dive into some key concepts we will use throughout this lesson: union, intersection, and complement.

Union
The union of two sets encompasses any element that exists in either one or both of them. We can represent this visually as a Venn diagram.

A Venn diagram that shows two overlapping circles, one that represents event A and one that represents event B. Both of these circles are shaded blue.

For example, let’s say we have two sets, A and B. A represents rolling an odd number with a six-sided die (the set {1, 3, 5}). 
B represents rolling a number greater than two (the set {3, 4, 5, 6}). The union of these two sets would be everything in either set A, set B, or both: {1, 3, 4, 5, 6}. 
We can write the union of two events mathematically as (A or B).

Intersection
The intersection of two sets encompasses any element that exists in both of the sets. Visually:

A Venn diagram that shows two overlapping circles, one that represents event A and one that represents event B. Only the overlap of the two circles is shaded.

The intersection of the above sets (A represents rolling an odd number on a six-sided die and B represents rolling a number greater than two) includes any value that appears in both sets: {3, 5}. 
We can write the intersection of two events mathematically as (A and B).

Complement
Lastly, the complement of a set consists of all possible outcomes outside of the set. Visually:

A Venn diagram that shows a circle representing event A. Everything outside of event A is shaded blue.

Consider set A from the above example (rolling an odd number on a 6-sided die). The complement of this set would be rolling an even number: {2, 4, 6}. 
We can write the complement of set A as AC. One key feature of complements is that a set and its complement cover the entire sample space. 
In this die roll example, the set of even numbers and odd numbers would cover all possible rolls: {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}.



Independence and Dependence
Imagine that we flip a fair coin 5 times and get 5 heads in a row. Does this affect the probability of getting heads on the next flip? 
Even though we may feel like it’s time to see “tails”, it is impossible for a past coin flip to impact a future one. 
The fact that previous coin flips do not affect future ones is called independence. Two events are independent if the occurrence of one event does not affect the probability of the other.

Are there cases where previous events DO affect the outcome of the next event? Suppose we have a bag of five marbles: two marbles are blue and three marbles are red. 
If we take one marble out of the bag, what is the probability that the second marble we take out is blue?

A diagram of the possible outcomes of pulling two marbles out of a bag when pulling them out without replacement.

This describes two events that are dependent. The probability of grabbing a blue marble in the second event depends on whether we take out a red or a blue marble in the first event.

What if we had put back the first marble? Is the probability that we pick a blue marble second independent or dependent on what we pick out first? 
In this case, the events would be independent.

A diagram of the possible outcomes of pulling two marbles out of a bag when pulling them out with replacement.

Why do we care if events are independent or dependent? Knowing this helps us quantify the probability of events that depend on preexisting knowledge. 
This helps researchers understand and predict complex processes such as:

Effectiveness of vaccines
The weather on a particular day
Betting odds for professional sports games
We will explore applications of this further in the lesson!
