Introduction: Inferential Statistics
Find out what you’ll learn in Inferential Statistics and why it’s important.

Welcome to Inferential Statistics
In this unit, we will cover a few hypothesis tests that can be used to make inferences about population(s). 
We’ll cover ways of implementing these hypothesis tests in Python and simulate some hypothesis tests without pre-built functions.

Why is this important?
Descriptive statistics and inferential statistics are two subfields of statistics. 
Descriptive statistics includes topics covered earlier in this path, including numerical and visual summaries of data. 
Hypothesis testing, on the other hand, is a form of inferential statistics, which is used to draw inferences about a population using a smaller sample of data.

This is important because descriptive statistics can tell us about the data that we have, but sometimes we can’t collect all of the data that we need to answer our questions. 
For example, maybe we want to know whether people who get a vaccine are less likely to get a disease. 
We can’t vaccinate every single person in the world to test this, so we’ll have to vaccinate a smaller sample of people instead. 
Then, if the vaccine seems to work in our sample, we need to know whether that could have been a random fluke — or if it’s likely to be true for the rest of the population. 
This is where hypothesis testing can help!

What will you learn?
At the end of this module, you will be able to:

Implement a One-Sample T-Test using Python
Understand how hypothesis tests work and simulate your own Binomial test
Where can you get help and discuss the content?
Learning is social. Whatever you’re working on, be sure to connect with the Codecademy community in the forums and Discord. 
Remember to check in with the community regularly, including for things like asking for code reviews on your project work and providing code reviews to others in the projects category, 
which can help to reinforce what you’ve learned.



Descriptive vs. Inferential Statistics
Learn about the difference between descriptive and inferential statistics.

Introduction
Descriptive and inferential statistics are two subfields of the larger field of statistics. Each is used for distinct purposes. 
In this article, we will introduce and explore some of the methods associated with each one.

Descriptive Statistics
Descriptive statistics is all about summarizing data. It is useful for making large amounts of information into an interpretable subset of numbers and/or visualizations. 
Imagine a long and complex spreadsheet; we would not be able to easily understand the data (any trends, patterns, or meaningful summaries) just by looking over the rows and columns. 
However, with descriptive statistics, we are able to distill that information into numbers and visualizations that we can make sense of.

Commonly used descriptive statistics include the average, median, frequency, standard deviation, and range of a set of values. These numeric descriptive statistics can also be displayed as visual representations, such as tables and graphs.

Example: Sales Company
Suppose you work at a large company and you have been given a dataset of sales information from the past month. You could use descriptive statistics to turn the dataset into a one-page report or table that will be more readable and provide more information than the raw data. Some potential descriptive statistics in the report could include:

Average # sales per day: 214.0667	% Salespeople that met quota: 60%
Total Sales of Each Product This Month:
This is a graph with bars of varying heights representing the total number of sales for each product.	
Monthly Sales Throughout the Year:This is a picture of a graph where the height of the line corresponds 
to the total number of product sales of a given month.
The data is easily interpretable in this form. 
Instead of trying to make sense of a spreadsheet of the raw data, we can learn specific pieces of information very easily. 
In this example, we can see that Product 3 is sold the least while Product 7 is sold the most. 
We can also see how sales varied throughout the year.

Multiple choice
Questions
Which of the following is not true about descriptive statistics?

Answer Choices
a) Descriptive statistics are limited to average, frequency, and percentages.

b) Descriptive statistics summarize larger amounts of data.

c) Descriptive statistics allows us to see information about the data that was not easily visible otherwise.

d) Numeric descriptive statistics can be visualized.

Answer: a) There are many other types of descriptive statistics including (but not limited to) range, correlation, and standard deviation.



Inferential Statistics
Inferential statistics is all about using a sample (a subset of a population) to make inferences about 
a larger population of interest. 
This is useful when we want to know something about a population but cannot observe every member — often due to 
time, feasibility, or monetary constraints. 
Some methods that are used in inferential statistics include hypothesis testing and regression.

The key to inferential statistics is understanding that samples do not always accurately reflect the population they came from. 
A large part of inferential statistics is quantifying our uncertainty about a population by looking at a smaller sample.

For example, the population shown below is made up of 10 blue dots and 5 red dots, which means that two thirds of the population is blue and one third is red. 
Suppose we take a random sample of 3 dots and want to use that sample to estimate proportion of the population that is blue. 
If we’re lucky, we’ll sample 2 blue dots and 1 red dot, as shown on the left, which would accurately represent the proportions of blue to red dots in the population. 
However, we could also randomly sample 3 blue dots, or 2 red dots and 1 blue dot — both of which do not match the population. 
Inferential statistics allows us to look at a sample and then quantify our uncertainty about how similar (or different) the entire population might be.

This is a picture of 3 circles, each with 10 blue dots and 5 red dots. The left circle has a sample of 2 blue dots and 1 red dot. The center circle has a sample of 3 blue dots. 
The right circle has a sample of 1 blue dot and 2 red dots.

Multiple choice
Questions
True or False: Because it is a subset of the population, a random sample will always perfectly represent the population.

Answer Choices
True
False

Answer: False = A random sample cannot be guaranteed to be a perfect representation of the population.


Example: Customer Contacting
Suppose you work at a sales company that is interested in testing two different customer contacting methods to see if one leads to a higher response rate than the other. 
It is impossible to test both methods with the entire population of every single past, present, and future customer. 
Instead, you could take a sample of 1,000 customers and randomly assign them to either a text contacting system or a phone calling system. 
After one month, you could then calculate the difference in response rate (a descriptive statistic) for the two sampled groups.

Suppose you find that the customers who received a text were 12% more likely to respond than the customers who received a phone call. 
This is a descriptive statistic about the sample — but what you really want to know is: 
if you had sampled the full population of customers, would you still have found at least a 12% difference in response rate?

This is where inferential statistics methods come in handy! For example, you could use a hypothesis test to estimate the probability that, 
in the full population, you will observe a higher response rate for texts compared to calls given that you observed a higher rate in your sample.

Example: Test Scores
Suppose you are a researcher studying the relationship between high school students’ homework grades and standardized test scores.
It would be very difficult and expensive to collect information on homework grades and standardized test scores for every single high school student in the world. 
Instead, you could find a random sample of students and inspect the relationship between homework grades and standardized test scores among that sample. 
Finally, you could use a regression analysis (another inferential statistics method) to understand whether a similar relationship is likely to exist in the larger population of all students.

Multiple choice
Questions
True or False: Inferential statistics allow us to better understand the population without having to observe the population as a whole.

Answer Choices
True
False

Answer: True = 
Random samples may not perfectly reflect the population, but we can become better informed about the population with every sample.



